README.md, before:

# Running:
To run elm version: elm-live --open -- src/Main.elm --output=elm.js in the plang-snake directory


## Introduction

We implemented the classic Snake Game in both Elm and Python. Elm is a purely functional language, while Python is object oriented. We used the same general structure and logic for both versions, but implemented them differently. We then looked at the differences between the two implementations:  


## General Structure
Both versions of the snake game are made up of the same general structure. 

Snake is made up of a list of segments, where the head is the leader and has its own properties. 

**Head segment:**
- Has a direction (left, right, up, down)
- Each frame, the head moves in its direction
- The direction can be changed with the arrow keys
- Head segment is attached to body 
- Head can collide with apple, body, and walls

**Body segments:**
- Each frame, each segment checks if it has collided with head segment 
- All body segments follow the path of the head
- Each body segment is made up of multiple circles, resulting in a smooth animation

**Apple:**
- Checks each frame for a collision with the head
- After collided goes to a new random coordinate on the screen


## Snake body movement
### Python Version:
We used object oriented programming to implement the movement of the snake’s body. 

Each part of the snake (including the head) is a `Segment`, which has a trail, a parent `Segment`, and a child `Segment`.

Every frame, a segment updates its trail, which contains its most recent two locations. 
```
def update_snake_trail(self):
       # add new coordinate to trail
       self.trail.append(self.canvas.coords(self.segment))


       # don't allow trail to exceed max length
       if len(self.trail) > MAX_TRAIL_LENGTH:
           # remove oldest coord from the trail
           self.trail = self.trail[1:]
```

Every frame, the head 'Segment' moves. It then tells its child segment to move as well. It will move to its parent’s (the head in this case) oldest trail value. That child segment then tells its child to move as well, and the movement travels down the snake body. 

```
def move(self):
       # check if parent has a full trail
       if len(self.parent.trail) == MAX_TRAIL_LENGTH:
           # move to the oldest trail value
           self.canvas.coords(self.segment, self.parent.trail[0])
           self.update_snake_trail()
           self.move_child()

   def move_child(self):
       if self.child:
           self.child.move()
```


### Elm Version:
We did not use objects to implement the movement of the snake’s body. Although the implementation is different, the behavior is the same as the Python version. 

Within the snake’s model are values for:
- x and y coordinates of the head
- count of number of apples eaten
- array of segments
- an array of recent trail coordinates

```
type alias Model = 
  {
    x : Float -- x coordinate of the head
    , y : Float -- y coordinate of the head
    ...
    , tailLength : Int -- number of segment chunks in the body
    ...
    , segments : Array Segment -- all body segments
    , head : Segment -- head segment
    , trail: Array Point
    ...
  }
 ```

There are still `Segment` types in this version, but they are not objects that can be instantiated like in the Python version.
A `Segment` is a type alias for a record:
` type alias Segment = {point: Point, distanceFromHead: Int} `

Each body segment follows the trail of the head segment. The position of the segment is based on its distance from the head. (ex. the 5th segment from the head will be placed at the 5th coordinate in the trail list)

```
-- Update the given Segment to match its Point data
updateSegment : Model -> Segment -> Segment
updateSegment model segment =
 let
   -- Which index of the trail array the segment should follow
   trailFollowIndex =
     (maxTrailLength model) - (segment.distanceFromHead)
 in
 -- Try to get the trail value to follow
 case Array.get trailFollowIndex model.trail of
   Nothing ->
     {point = segment.point
     , distanceFromHead = segment.distanceFromHead}
   Just aPoint ->
     {point = aPoint
     , distanceFromHead = segment.distanceFromHead}
```

Segments are drawn each frame based on their data
```
-- Draw a Segment based on its Point data
drawSegment : Segment -> Shape
drawSegment segment =
 circle (rgb 255 255 0) 25
  |> fade 0.5
  |> move segment.point.x segment.point.y
```

## Collisions
When checking whether or not the snake has eaten/collided with the apple object the logic is mostly the same between python and elm but the code looks a bit different. For both python and elm we check whether or not the distance between the center x and y of the apple and the center x and y of the snake head is less than their two radius’ added together. 

### Collisions with Apple
#### Elm Version
In the Elm version this is very simple. We just take the hypotenuse of the different between x and y values for the snake head and the apple and return true if that distance is less than the two radius’ added together and false if otherwise. 

```
collidedWithApple: Model -> Bool  
collidedWithApple model = ((hypot(model.x - model.appleX) (model.y - model.appleY) < radius + appleRadius))
```

#### Python Version
In Python it looks a little different. Since tkinter determines coordinates of objects based on their upper left corner of the bounding box we need to calculate the center coordinates of the apple and the snake in order to calculate the distance between those two points and check if they are less than  sum of the diameters of the apple and the snake head. 

```
def check_eat_apple(self):
    # gets coordinates from snake and apple
    snake_x0, snake_y0, snake_x1, snake_y1 = self.canvas.coords(self.head.segment)
    apple_x0, apple_y0, apple_x1, apple_y1 = self.canvas.coords(self.apple.apple)

    # calculate center coordinates of snake and apple
    snakeCenterX = snake_x0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER / 2
    snakeCenterY = snake_y0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER / 2
    appleCenterX = apple_x0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER / 2
    appleCenterY = apple_y0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER / 2

    # check if the snake head and apple instersect
    if math.dist([snakeCenterX, snakeCenterY], [appleCenterX, appleCenterY]) < self.SNAKE_DIAMETER/2 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER/2:
        # calculate new random coordinates for apple
```

### Collisions with Self
#### Python
In the Python version we do something similar to the way we check if it has eaten the apple. First we calculate the center x and y of the snake head then loop through the list of segments of the snake. The first bound on the range makes it so that it doesn’t check collision with the first 3 segments. When testing we had some errors with the game immediately ending when adding a new segment because they would initially be added to the canvas too close to the snake head and would then cause the check_hit_self method to initiate the game over response. Within the for loop it calculates the center of the segment it is looping through and calculates the distance between the head and the segment to return true if the distance is less than the diameter of the head/one of the segments.

```
def check_hit_self(self):
    snake_x0, snake_y0, snake_x1, snake_y1 = self.canvas.coords(self.head.segment)
    headCenterX = snake_x0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER
    headCenterY = snake_y0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER

    # checks for intersection with snake segments but skips the first few segments
    for i in range(self.CHUNK_SIZE * 3 , len(self.snake)):
        s = self.snake[i]
        segment_x0, segment_y0, segment_x1, segment_y1 = self.canvas.coords(s.segment)
        segmentCenterX = segment_x0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER
        segmentCenterY = segment_y0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER
        if math.dist([headCenterX, headCenterY], [segmentCenterX, segmentCenterY]) < self.SNAKE_DIAMETER:
            self.game_over = True
```

### Elm
In Elm the code is much more succinct but fairly similar to the python version. The collidedSelf function does something very familiar by just calculating the hypotenuse between the coordinates of the head and segment and returning whether or not it is less than the diameter of the snake segment. The checkSegments function maps the segments and calls collidedSelf on each one skipping the first 30 segments with Array.slice 30 -1 and returning true for that segments if there is a collision. The array then checks if there are any trues.

```
-- Calls the collidedSelf method on all segments, if the segments not originally touching the head bumps with head, return True
checkSegments segments model = 
  segments |> (Array.map (collidedSelf model)) |> Array.slice 30 -1 |> Array.any (\x -> x == True)
 
-- Check if self(single segment) collided with head
collidedSelf model segment = 
  ((hypot(model.x - segment.point.x) (model.y -  segment.point.y) < radius + appleRadius))
```

## Random

We use random when we want to update the coordinates of the apple. 

### Python Version
Python random is just 'random.randrange'
```
x0 = random.randrange(self.CANVAS_WIDTH/20, self.CANVAS_WIDTH) - self.CANVAS_WIDTH/20
           y0 = random.randrange(self.CANVAS_HEIGHT/20, self.CANVAS_HEIGHT) - self.CANVAS_HEIGHT/20
           x1 = x0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER
           y1 = y0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER

           self.apple.move(x0, y0, x1, y1)
```

### Elm Version
In elm, random is a bit more complicated, and our approach technically isn’t random since we are using a seed. Using a seed basically gives a set list of random values that we pull from rather than generating something completely new. 

```
(newRandomX, nextSeedX) = if collidedWithApple model then
                Random.step (Random.float -300 300) model.seedX
                else (model.appleX, model.seedX)
(newRandomY, nextSeedY) = if collidedWithApple model then
                Random.step (Random.float -300 300) model.seedY
                else (model.appleY, model.seedY)
```

This is because of the purely functional aspect of Elm and how output is purely based on the input. For more on Elm randomness, and something that is more random, it would be interesting to look into Elm's Random.Generator 

## Conclusion
We were able to create the Snake Game in both Elm and Python with the same logic, but with different implementations. In writing the Elm version, we did not encounter any runtime errors, only compile-time errors. In writing the Python version, we encountered both runtime and compile-time errors. While the Elm version is more difficult for us to read and write (because we are more unfamiliar with it), it would be easier to implement a pause and resume game function than it would be in the Python version.

Commit message:

Updated README based on Paul's notes

README.md, after:

# Running:
To run elm version: elm-live --open -- src/Main.elm --output=elm.js in the plang-snake directory


## Introduction

We implemented the classic Snake Game in both Elm and Python. Elm is a purely functional language, while Python is object oriented. We used the same general structure and logic for both versions, but implemented them differently. We then looked at the differences between the two implementations:  


## General Structure
Both versions of the snake game are made up of the same general structure. 

Snake is made up of a list of segments, where the head is the leader and has its own properties. 

**Head segment:**
- Has a direction (left, right, up, down)
- Each frame, the head moves in its direction
- The direction can be changed with the arrow keys
- Head segment is attached to body 
- Head can collide with apple, body, and walls

**Body segments:**
- Each frame, each segment checks if it has collided with head segment 
- All body segments follow the path of the head
- Each body segment is made up of multiple circles, resulting in a smooth animation

**Apple:**
- Checks each frame for a collision with the head
- After collided goes to a new random coordinate on the screen


## Snake body movement
### Python Version:
We used object oriented programming to implement the movement of the snake’s body. 

Each part of the snake (including the head) is a `Segment`, which has a trail, a parent `Segment`, and a child `Segment`.

Every frame, a segment updates its trail, which contains its most recent two locations. 
```
def update_snake_trail(self):
       # add new coordinate to trail
       self.trail.append(self.canvas.coords(self.segment))


       # don't allow trail to exceed max length
       if len(self.trail) > MAX_TRAIL_LENGTH:
           # remove oldest coord from the trail
           self.trail = self.trail[1:]
```

Every frame, the head 'Segment' moves. It then tells its child segment to move as well. It will move to its parent’s (the head in this case) oldest trail value. That child segment then tells its child to move as well, and the movement travels down the snake body. 

```
def move(self):
       # check if parent has a full trail
       if len(self.parent.trail) == MAX_TRAIL_LENGTH:
           # move to the oldest trail value
           self.canvas.coords(self.segment, self.parent.trail[0])
           self.update_snake_trail()
           self.move_child()

   def move_child(self):
       if self.child:
           self.child.move()
```


### Elm Version:
We did not use objects to implement the movement of the snake’s body. Although the implementation is different, the behavior is the same as the Python version. 

Because Elm is purely functional, we could not create segment objects that have parent and child relationships. Pure functions cannot have external effects on anything, and parent/child relationships would violate that rule. 

Within the snake’s model are values for:
- x and y coordinates of the head
- count of number of apples eaten
- array of segments
- an array of recent trail coordinates

```
type alias Model = 
  {
    x : Float -- x coordinate of the head
    , y : Float -- y coordinate of the head
    ...
    , tailLength : Int -- number of segment chunks in the body
    ...
    , segments : Array Segment -- all body segments
    , head : Segment -- head segment
    , trail: Array Point
    ...
  }
 ```

There are still `Segment` types in this version, but they are not objects that can be instantiated like in the Python version, instead it is a piece of immutable data.
A `Segment` is a type alias for a record:
` type alias Segment = {point: Point, distanceFromHead: Int} `

Each body segment follows the trail of the head segment. The position of the segment is based on its distance from the head. (ex. the 5th segment from the head will be placed at the 5th coordinate in the trail list)

Each frame, segments are updated based on the previous game state:

```
-- Update the given Segment to match its Point data
updateSegment : Model -> Segment -> Segment
updateSegment model segment =
 let
   -- Which index of the trail array the segment should follow
   trailFollowIndex =
     (maxTrailLength model) - (segment.distanceFromHead)
 in
 -- Try to get the trail value to follow
 case Array.get trailFollowIndex model.trail of
   Nothing ->
     {point = segment.point
     , distanceFromHead = segment.distanceFromHead}
   Just aPoint ->
     {point = aPoint
     , distanceFromHead = segment.distanceFromHead}
```

Segments are drawn each frame based on their data
```
-- Draw a Segment based on its Point data
drawSegment : Segment -> Shape
drawSegment segment =
 circle (rgb 255 255 0) 25
  |> fade 0.5
  |> move segment.point.x segment.point.y
```

## Collisions
When checking whether or not the snake has eaten/collided with the apple object the logic is mostly the same between python and elm but the code looks a bit different. For both python and elm we check whether or not the distance between the center x and y of the apple and the center x and y of the snake head is less than their two radius’ added together. 

### Collisions with Apple
#### Elm Version
In the Elm version this is very simple. We just take the hypotenuse of the different between x and y values for the snake head and the apple and return true if that distance is less than the two radius’ added together and false if otherwise. 

```
collidedWithApple: Model -> Bool  
collidedWithApple model = ((hypot(model.x - model.appleX) (model.y - model.appleY) < radius + appleRadius))
```

#### Python Version
In Python it looks a little different. Since tkinter determines coordinates of objects based on their upper left corner of the bounding box we need to calculate the center coordinates of the apple and the snake in order to calculate the distance between those two points and check if they are less than  sum of the diameters of the apple and the snake head. 

```
def check_eat_apple(self):
    # gets coordinates from snake and apple
    snake_x0, snake_y0, snake_x1, snake_y1 = self.canvas.coords(self.head.segment)
    apple_x0, apple_y0, apple_x1, apple_y1 = self.canvas.coords(self.apple.apple)

    # calculate center coordinates of snake and apple
    snakeCenterX = snake_x0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER / 2
    snakeCenterY = snake_y0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER / 2
    appleCenterX = apple_x0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER / 2
    appleCenterY = apple_y0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER / 2

    # check if the snake head and apple instersect
    if math.dist([snakeCenterX, snakeCenterY], [appleCenterX, appleCenterY]) < self.SNAKE_DIAMETER/2 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER/2:
        # calculate new random coordinates for apple
```

### Collisions with Self
#### Python
In the Python version we do something similar to the way we check if it has eaten the apple. First we calculate the center x and y of the snake head then loop through the list of segments of the snake. The first bound on the range makes it so that it doesn’t check collision with the first 3 segments. When testing we had some errors with the game immediately ending when adding a new segment because they would initially be added to the canvas too close to the snake head and would then cause the check_hit_self method to initiate the game over response. Within the for loop it calculates the center of the segment it is looping through and calculates the distance between the head and the segment to return true if the distance is less than the diameter of the head/one of the segments.

```
def check_hit_self(self):
    snake_x0, snake_y0, snake_x1, snake_y1 = self.canvas.coords(self.head.segment)
    headCenterX = snake_x0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER
    headCenterY = snake_y0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER

    # checks for intersection with snake segments but skips the first few segments
    for i in range(self.CHUNK_SIZE * 3 , len(self.snake)):
        s = self.snake[i]
        segment_x0, segment_y0, segment_x1, segment_y1 = self.canvas.coords(s.segment)
        segmentCenterX = segment_x0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER
        segmentCenterY = segment_y0 + self.SNAKE_DIAMETER
        if math.dist([headCenterX, headCenterY], [segmentCenterX, segmentCenterY]) < self.SNAKE_DIAMETER:
            self.game_over = True
```

### Elm
In Elm the code is much more succinct but fairly similar to the python version. The collidedSelf function does something very familiar by just calculating the hypotenuse between the coordinates of the head and segment and returning whether or not it is less than the diameter of the snake segment. The checkSegments function maps the segments and calls collidedSelf on each one skipping the first 30 segments with Array.slice 30 -1 and returning true for that segments if there is a collision. The array then checks if there are any trues.

```
-- Calls the collidedSelf method on all segments, if the segments not originally touching the head bumps with head, return True
checkSegments segments model = 
  segments |> (Array.map (collidedSelf model)) |> Array.slice 30 -1 |> Array.any (\x -> x == True)
 
-- Check if self(single segment) collided with head
collidedSelf model segment = 
  ((hypot(model.x - segment.point.x) (model.y -  segment.point.y) < radius + appleRadius))
```

## Random

We use random when we want to update the coordinates of the apple. 

### Python Version
Python random is just 'random.randrange'
```
x0 = random.randrange(self.CANVAS_WIDTH/20, self.CANVAS_WIDTH) - self.CANVAS_WIDTH/20
           y0 = random.randrange(self.CANVAS_HEIGHT/20, self.CANVAS_HEIGHT) - self.CANVAS_HEIGHT/20
           x1 = x0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER
           y1 = y0 + self.APPLE_DIAMETER

           self.apple.move(x0, y0, x1, y1)
```

### Elm Version
In elm, random is a bit more complicated, and our approach technically isn’t random since we are using a seed. Using a seed basically gives a set list of random values that we pull from rather than generating something completely new. 

```
(newRandomX, nextSeedX) = if collidedWithApple model then
                Random.step (Random.float -300 300) model.seedX
                else (model.appleX, model.seedX)
(newRandomY, nextSeedY) = if collidedWithApple model then
                Random.step (Random.float -300 300) model.seedY
                else (model.appleY, model.seedY)
```

This is because of the purely functional aspect of Elm and how output is purely based on the input. For more on Elm randomness, and something that is more random, it would be interesting to look into Elm's Random.Generator 

## Conclusion
We were able to create the Snake Game in both Elm and Python with the same logic, but with different implementations. In writing the Elm version, we did not encounter any runtime errors, only compile-time errors. This is because of its pure functions which cannot have any external effects. In writing the Python version, we encountered both runtime and compile-time errors. The Elm version is more difficult for us to read and write (in part because we are more unfamiliar with it). However, was more difficult to debug the Python version because of runtime errors. Once we could get Elm to compile, we no longer had to worry about runtime errors. It it would be easier to implement a pause and resume game function in Elm than it would be in Python, but other new game functions that require code reorganization would likely be easier to implement in Python.
